[Music]
Jack Straw claimed of food council tax
on his second home it's all been laid
there in the last couple of weeks
slipping your address as an extravagance
to faff the Conservative MP absolutely
outrageous not a good morning for the
government's two years as completely
unacceptable James Pannell is accused in
The Telegraph today of avoiding the
payment a capital gains match according
to the Telegraph they know they are next
it's a lot of claims for guessed it 249
16,000 pounds for installing a wet room
people are extremely angry across the
political spectrum all MPs appear to be
in it for themselves we're just normal
people and we pay every day out of our
salaries to go to work for a fuel for a
train we pay for a lunch yeah we pay for
everything under the summaries mortgages
everything and now we're actually
looking at a group of people that
effectively we employ and they're taking
everything and their wages to state and
the mood became I would say angry we're
paying for you and you're taking it
twice the probably deserves to know what
was going
[Music]
[Applause]
good morning and welcome more awful
stories of MPs expenses Dodgers today
would you like to have a look at the
expenses of every single MP the expense
of scandal just keeps on going they're
absolutely sensational stories we knew
instantly it was going to be almost like
a demolition this was the biggest
political scandal since Profumo if
they're a disgrace we'd be crucified
after his eyes they tried to send the
police round to shut us down it was
wrong and we must accept that and we've
got to do something pretty quickly to
sort it out
Gordon Brown has pledged to crack down
on ministers found to be abusing the
expensive system these are just a few of
the MPs hanging on by their fingertips
tonight some face very awkward questions
one of the problems with the system that
we have had is that it appears to have
allowed things like that to happen
[Music]
my name is Chris Evans and I'm the
editor of The Telegraph 10 years ago
back in 2009 I was head of news Robert
Wynette's I'm the deputy editor here and
at the time I was the deputy political
editor my name is William Lewis and I
was honored to be the editor of The
Telegraph Christopher Hope back in 2009
I was the white all editor matthew
bailey at the time of MPs expenses i was
the news editor i just i was telegraph i
was report a telegraph I'd be at Sunday
Times for four years before that and
yeah I was about three or four weeks
into being a paragraph it was only a
year or so after the financial crisis
and I think you know that has to be
remembered as the context because we
were in a recession the economy was
tanking it was just after the financial
crisis had hits and people were
beginning to digest the reality of
what's the collapse of LeMans
Bear Stearns was gonna mean for people
around the world but particularly in the
UK politically we were in two years into
Gordon Brown's Premiership and it wasn't
going very well for him the Tories were
under David Cameron were mounting a
pretty serious challenge to him in the
polls
there's a feeling of oh I think of drift
in the country a lack of trust said he
aimed at the flat your system of bankers
not being punished for all all of the
chaos wrought obviously we were
beginning to see the Gordon Brown
Premiership and the first wobbles so it
was it was into that kind of environment
that the the story began to hit paper
was under new ownership we were quite a
new team we had a young editor we had
been through a really radical change
program we had tried to be the most
forward-thinking integrated newsroom
there is out there we recruited some of
the brightest sand the best from across
Fleet streets and it was a good time to
be involved in something like this
the untold story of MP's expenses is
that quite a lot of people turned it
down before before we did it and and I
was the head of news and I was reading
the papers every day and I could see
that these bits of MPs expenses were
appearing in various places and I was I
was asking various people who worked for
you where do you think this is coming
from and and why why can't we have it we
first got wind of the env expenses
scandal really from from the Information
Act when some test requests went into
Parliament to ask what a were MPs
claiming for but and they should have
given a huge amount of information quite
quickly because under foi there's quite
tight time limits to give the
information and the MPs passed Commons
just wouldn't do that when the Freedom
of Information Act was brought in in
2005 one of the first things that
everyone did at that time was to put in
these requests to get details of MPs
expenses so the telegraph the Sunday
Times independent campaigners like
Heather Brooks had all been pushing very
hard for several years to try and get
this information
I'm Heather Brooke I did a lot of
campaigning and reporting around the
Freedom of Information Act and I took
the additional cost surveillance case to
the High Court for MPs expenses I was
trying to look at the whole system in a
holistic way and so I saw these little
stories coming out like they would go
after one person it was a scandal and
then it would be brushed aside and I was
like you just scratching the surface
again like the problem isn't like the
bad apple it's the whole pie you know
it's rotten for several months indeed
several years we knew that there was
this great trove of expences data out
there there was a few months so we
suddenly started seeing quite a lot of
information come out there's stuff about
Jackie Smith's husband
the Home Secretary Jackie Smith was one
of the first to face the scrutiny media
sources say she was not at home at the
time she lives with her husband Richard
Tim Nick I am really sorry for any
embarrassment I have caused Jackie we
were aware that there was probably
someone out there who had this disc we
knew
that MPs expenses were going to be
published because various people had
been campaigning for their release and
had fought various court battles it
later transpired that had the Telegraph
not done its investigation then most of
the dita have emerged because what the
MPs were planning to do was to publish
this stuff with all the salient details
redacted blacked out so you couldn't
really make sense of what was going on
and indeed that's why this material was
offered to us and to other papers
because the people involved in the
redaction were so outraged that what
they could see was going on but that
wouldn't be known because of the fact
that it was being carefully excised a
mine manager gave us a basic outline
that we were going to be dealing with a
new process to do with MPs expenses and
that process was the reduction of
certain information that we will be told
to remove initially what happens is a
lot of information is presented on the
screen in front of you our honest
receipts or letters from the feeds
office whatever and initially you're not
actually reading the content because
you're concentrating on learning the
process once you've cracked the process
she's my day two in the morning then
you're starting to take in some of the
information and the first inkling you
get is is when you hear er
it's just a society in disbelief people
are just frustrated not angry to start
with because you don't actually
comprehend just what it is that you're
looking at
until the penny drops people were
starting then to correlate between their
own lives and an MP and what they were
actually planning for the mood became I
would say angry by saying wait then I'm
gonna be kind you could cut it some days
with a knife
and just exasperation totally guys were
back from Afghanistan were told us
they're running working to earn money to
buy equipment it's a fact that they
don't have enough equipment or the
equipment might be inferior they sign up
to do a job they understand that they
know they're gonna take losses the
members of the Armed Forces that's what
they signed up to do they take no
problem with that
but when you see your own MPs who have
sent you to war effectively what they
call coining it over and above what they
should be coming it's not the expenses
that you owe me
it's the claims of what they were for
our most energetic and tenacious report
at the time was was Robert Burnett so I
said to Rob will you please go and find
out who it is who's Hawking this stuff
around and asked them if we can have it
I also had a conversation with the then
editor will Lewis and said I really
think we should be going after this and
and he was as keen as mustard I wanted
to find out more I was like well that's
you got to keep going guys I mean you
have a sense of obligation
we were totally mystified no talking to
all the people that I would normally
talk to in and around Downing Street on
the one hand that they were equally
mystified and there are all sorts of
rumors going around about was there a
whistleblower out there was there
someone inside the fees office who was
leaking this stuff so it's just a case
of picking up the phone and just sort of
putting feelers out and saying look if
this is out there we're interested in
just spreading the word that we were
sort of in the market for this stuff if
it was available I'd known Robert
Winnett we'd worked at sunny times
together and I known that he was chasing
the disc I mean it was kind of at the
time as very much everybody wanted the
MPs expenses disc so I knew Rob was
after it I knew he was sort of having
communications of people that might lead
to it and I was actually I was on
holiday between my two jobs and every
cell phone every Interop being like if
you get it tell me I'll work I'll
happily work for free even though my dog
hasn't started someone had phoned Rose
prints in the lobby when she was working
one Sunday with some information about
this a guy at the other end said hello
would you be interested
and looking at a disk of every single
MPs expenses and I said yes I've heard
and by pure coincidence this was an
American PR guy who I'd known ten
fifteen years before because he was a
personal finance public relations guy
Rob not so long afterwards came back to
me and said I think I know who is
Hawking this stuff around and I said
great let's let's organize a meeting
let's let's get them in so I called him
and then I remember meeting him I think
in quite short order because of the
calls that have been flying around the
next morning in a wine bar just off the
Strand he said he for tea knew someone
who was involved in all this he was a
man called John wick and I think again
within 24-48 hours I had met John wick
and I'd brought them both into the
office to meet Chris Evans who was then
the head of Newsom we began talking to
them about how this might work John wick
I run a risk management company based in
UK I got involved with the NBA's
expenses because some people came to see
me who had been working on the redaction
of mb's expenses who were concerned as
to what was going on I wanted to get it
in out into the public eye they had
tried once and it hadn't been successful
they thought that I'd might be able to
advise them how to do it we had a
company we use for public relations
guidance and I talked to the MD of that
and asked how I talked to the media the
person we were talking to was a guy
called John wick who has a military
background and he came to explain to us
how the person who was providing him
with this information were were people
who are in the room dealing with the
redaction of information which was gonna
be released under the Freedom of
Information Act we actually could see
what was can be removed and in essence
the public would never see what we'd
sing and that's the real frustration
because the detail is all in the
unredacted not the redacted these people
had sat there day after day week after
week becoming increasingly angry
we're just normal people and we pay
every day out of our salaries to come to
work for a fuel floor train we pay for a
lunch and we paying for everything out
of a Sony's mortgages everything and now
we're actually looking at a group of
people that effectively we employ and
they're taking everything and their
wages just like ordinary people I've got
to pay for everything under their salary
and wages
so when you've worked in kind of way
just what you paid everything for that's
what I've always done what you're doing
it's abuse and I think it was that sense
of anger that was relate to him and said
look this is a real real scandal we're
not insiders in Westminster we're just
noir people who pay our taxes and you
just will not believe what what is going
on here and someone needs to be told
about this and so one Monday morning he
and I sat down with two gentlemen one
called John and another called Henry and
Rob and I tried to persuade them to to
let us see what they had and they would
have slightly confused state because
hitherto nobody had really expressed
interest in what they had to say what
they had to offer we we were one of the
first to have a website The Telegraph so
I said to them look not only will we we
treat you fairly we'll also treat the
MPS fairly we'll publish all of it every
single MPs expenses there was a
financial aspect to it as well Chris
Evans and myself had a discussion which
we said look well The Telegraph don't
pay for stories in this way we're not a
tabloid newspaper it's not something we
do but you know this is sensational
these people need some insurance that
you know they could lose their careers I
remember very clearly Rob and I leaving
that meeting which was in room just over
there
I'm walking across to see the editor in
his office which was just over there and
I said to him we're gonna need to offer
them some money and we thought what
what's the most we could possibly offer
them and we said well maybe maybe maybe
we can persuade the editor to offer them
30 thousand pounds so we walked into
wills office and he just said hundred
thousand pounds honestly that the
payment thing is a red herring right I
mean this is one of the most important
bits of journalism if not the most
important bits of journalism in the
post-war period I can't think of a more
impactful bit of journalism for Britain
and British society highlighting such
profound wrongdoing and systemic abuse
the highest levels of government and
Parliament's the next thing I remember
was Rob actually bringing the disc into
the office and it was a Friday afternoon
it was a sunny Friday afternoon I was
waiting for him to come in
and he had this brown envelope and it
wasn't a disc at all it was a strange
red plastic box
we opened up and we were just looking at
it and it sort of came up all these
different and files and everything and
we went straight for Gordon Brown we
opened it up and up came his his I think
the first thing we saw is this itemized
phone bill and Rob just went we're going
to jail we looked at it and and lo and
behold it seemed to have a lot of MPs
expenses on it because we had one hard
drive and we needed the next morning we
knew that several journalists would all
be starting to work on it we had to copy
it across and so we've got another hard
drive and it starts the copying process
across and then we realize it would take
about 40 minutes copying across so we
went to work amongst for lunch in the
interview I left it in the middle of the
telegraph office while it was copying
across region hindsight seems to
complete madness
we are about ten days before we started
publishing we were on this
extraordinarily tight deadline we formed
a team in it it's now known as the
bunker but it's an office at the back of
the office and we put together
deliberately a range of people from
people who've just joined who were
relatively inexperienced to some of our
most experienced journalists people who
are tenacious and passionate but but
with a range of experience from from the
very young to the very seasoned and
people I thought would would spark well
off each other the team we put together
and I remember going around each of them
individually at the time and telling
them roughly what it was was Gordon
Raynor who was our chief reporter at the
time Rosa Prince who worked alongside me
in the lobby
who was a real experienced political
correspondent Chris Hope who even then
had a reputation for digging into things
Holly Watts who I'd worked with on
investigative staff including expensive
stories at Sunday Times Martyn Beckford
who again had a reputation as a sort of
forensic journalist who is very good at
going through data and digging out
figures and so on John Swain who was a
rising star at the time had just come
off a graduate trainee scheme Caroline
Gamal who again was one of our more
experienced news reporters who was
excellent at going out and talking to
people on the doorstep and and Nick
Allen who again was one of our top news
reporters again relatively young they
got a phone call to say can you come in
tomorrow at half-past seven for a
training exercise and I've been the
newspaper since 2003 so I was quite used
to regular retraining and training and I
explained to them what was going on and
I said there would have to be a cover
story about some sort of digital
training to explain why they were off
their jobs for two weeks and we locked
them all in a room just around the
corner which no longer exists and said
right can you go ferreting four stories
I think I just remember like people
arriving and be a bit kind of like you
know fine people like I think Chris hope
you had to get up really early so Gordon
John Swain was there as well
and I don't think it was you know we
just they will just have grumbled their
way in and then the movement from
low-level grumble to total delight
work started yes everyone externally was
told that we were working on a new
training scheme which was an emergency
backup system and we asked him not to
talk about it share any information
beyond that room even though it's the
toilet they weren't they were told not
to talk about it so right from the
beginning we were drilled into us that
this was secret that we couldn't tell
anyone we didn't even tell our two other
colleagues over in in Westminster it was
just a total news blackout my girlfriend
worked for the Daily Mail so I was very
conscious that I couldn't share the
information that we had the disc I think
she thought that our relationship wasn't
going to last very long so when the
first when the first paper came out that
was somewhat of a relief to me I do
remember there's some muttering about an
IT program and then no one was seen and
so for those first few days before going
and joining the bunkered It was as
though it was in this net no one knew
where the bunker was it was in this
mysterious part of the building when and
none of the reporters in there were
being seen because they were coming in
before people were arriving and leaving
after everyone else had left so my
feeling in that room was one of extreme
excitement because as a journalist you
want to try and kick the tires shake the
system and it's very rare that you ever
get a chance to make real change real
journalism and a chance to really serve
hold that that plays Parliament to
account it was a bubbling of excitement
and people were obviously curious but
then in fairly short order they plugged
in which their disk of heat for each of
them and they suddenly started looking
this at this stuff and it was amazing
how quickly everyone suddenly became
totally obsessed with it
the bunker itself it was rotten you
walked in and it was it felt like had
really low ceiling it's no bunker was
rotten it had no windows and it simply
had a bunch of computers in it it was
sort of fluorescent light basically had
this motley selectional journalist
sitting in it even when we started it
wasn't the most pleasant places because
one of the IT guys used as a changing
room fair when he arrived in his cycling
gear so he he stole all his like crazy
in one of the filing cabinets and it
started as a fairly pleasant work
environment
but every evening we're eating takeaways
in there the cleaners weren't allowed in
because we were paranoid that someone
was gonna go through the rubbish so it
quickly deteriorated into a fairly
unpleasant student like dicks the reason
that it wasn't cleaned was because there
was a rumor that we had it was quite a
febrile atmosphere and we I can't
remember where this rumor started but we
came to believe that the news of the
world was trying to infiltrate the
cleaning staff and whether or not this
rumor was true it was decided that we
shouldn't allow any cleaners in hello
viewers we've all done the government
Parliament sweaty Dan sushi around us
takeaway food the olive expenses is
quite simple for MPs they need money to
survive in two places firstly in their
constituency they've got to be able to
live there with their family and talk to
around 80,000 people who live in the
area and help them through all sorts of
issues and of course drawing a week for
a few days it must be in Parliament to
vote on government bills meat ministers
and fly the flag for their local
constituency
so they're required to have two homes
but of course most people only have one
home so what's fair well what was seen
to be fan and is still the case now is
they given help to live in London where
their second home should be and that's
where the expense ISM came in so they
were given as allowance to spend on a
second home when you open up this
disk you don't have a whole list of MPs
and misdemeanors you just have thousands
and thousands and thousands of receipts
so you're taking a leap of faith that
there is something in there it's not
it's not obvious what there is and as
you open each one you'd have be left
with a number of options for each MP you
can look at their their ACA their living
allowance their IEP which is an office
office expenses and you just click on it
and then within each file there'll be a
year and for each MP there'd be five
years and each file the piece of fifty
pages of all that all their claims we
had to start looking through what were
PDFs of documents there was no way of
electronically searched through these
things it was it was just literally
handwritten most of it so you couldn't
search for anything you literally have
to look at each every single page and
just click click click you're really
lifting the lid on the public persona of
the MP and looking into their quite
personal communications with the fees
office people like Holly Watts were very
very good at detecting patterns and
thinking things were too similar and so
on and so forth so so they spent about
two weeks locked in this room going over
stuff and preparing some stories for
publication and we were trying to put it
into some sort of order so we'd be able
to compare claims and so on from one
person to the next they could see
patterns in things if if for example the
amount someone was claiming for a
mortgage hadn't changed for years and
years and years and years and years and
couldn't really be explained by a fixed
rate then you think maybe this is not a
real mortgage and we were starting to
see things like the addresses where
people lived and the fat people were
claiming multiple addresses of moving
between houses which we just had no idea
was even possible under this under the
scheme until we saw it there and full
Technicolor so had we not known what the
address was that they put down on those
forms we would never have known that
they were switching between one address
and another to claim on more than one
property we wouldn't have known if two
MPs who were married or living together
were claiming for the same address we
wouldn't have known that their devoted
capital gains tax when they're sold
properties because we couldn't have
checked Land Registry records to see the
it's Selden a property how much it had
sold for how much profit they've made
what Parliament proved when they
published the expenses themselves was
that they had intended all along to gave
the public pretty useless information
which would have meant they got off
scot-free
we had a meeting in the morning which is
when Toni Gallagher came in and
essentially Chris presented him with the
plan for the next day and the and it was
the cabinet we had a very orderly
process about how we were going to go
after different MPs so we're going to
start with the government and start with
the cabinet and within a few days we
were going to go to the Shadow Cabinet
and then we were going to do you know
senior well known MPs the Liberal
Democrats when we devoted a day to
Northern Ireland MPs and then it was a
matter really of just going after junior
ministers ex ministers and MPs who had
colorful stories to tell we were trying
to go eyeballs on every single document
those around 2 million pages that was
quite quite difficult doing in a few
weeks so once we started looking at the
the expenses disks we had after when
Davis is involved in giant letters for
each MP I said it's got to go in a
bespoke letter it had to start saying
these are the allegations we put you or
these are the things we want
explanations on why did you behave like
that or is this correct or why was this
item claimed for and then the MPs were
given a time frame to respond by usually
the end of that day it was also my job
to get the tone right don't be too
aggressive be neutral give people a
chance
keep the presumption of innocence at the
forefront of your mind this is what we
found out what have you got to say from
the start we were concerned this could
be a hoax that is the big concern for
any journalists how true is the document
you're holding are they real or fake
yeah look I remain paranoids
until the moment of publication you know
that Hitler Diaries moment lives long in
everyone's memory but that was always
the risk we wouldn't know that until we
started approaching the people who were
gonna write about and we couldn't do
that until we knew who they were
we were ready to publish because once
that started it would start a chain of
events that we couldn't stop and so
until you get someone saying this is
true you know and we're sorry but I'm
gonna say they're sorry when I do it I
don't believe it
the first person to respond was Jack
Straw who provided an explanation as to
why he felt affairs council tax on time
only he could have known that so at that
point we knew that this information was
genuine
when Jack straws confirmation came
through in his considered a response
that's the first time I allowed myself
to get excited and Jack Straw came back
around 244 I think was in the day
explaining why he did a claim for
council tax and hid it was a clerical
error and he'll sort it out and once he
said that single point about causal tax
we knew we're in business because the
document was true we had a really really
big scoop and the fire was gonna come I
was just over the moon because I thought
he was the justice secretary he was in
charge of the vehicle machine if anybody
was gonna go for an injunction and
trigger it it was him
and it wasn't it was a hands-off yes I
made a mistake
I've paid the council tax back and I
thought I think I'm on record is saying
as soon as I heard that we're in
business
[Music]
in those days it was much more common
for newspapers with big scoops to spoof
for the first edition so you would run a
first edition that was an MP's expenses
so no one would see it in time to change
up and you'd have the exclusive all to
yourself in the second edition and there
was a sort of back and forth during the
day about whether we were going to do
that but if we were going to do that I
had to get on with actually doing an
ordinary paper and I remember ironically
it was a really scratchy news day there
wasn't much going on and I was sort of
scrabbling around looking for a story
now remembered Joanna Lumley had had
some big Rauh about the Gurkhas with
with the government and it was I sort of
had to propose splashing on that even
though my heart of hearts I was sort of
distracted by the fact we had this other
there's bombshell sitting in this bunker
then we decided we would pursue it to me
we agreed with the vendors to go ahead
and do it and then there was a there was
a sort of strange hiatus where we we all
sat down and asked ourselves whether we
should and shouldn't proceed there was a
lot of tension the day before because
we're putting the letters together and
then there was a lot of excitement when
the letters started coming back in and
people responding so we knew it was like
a really you know it was a big deal and
it was true and I think the main
broadcast has been invited in said Nick
Robinson was in the office John Craig
and I think Tom Bradbury so I'd spent
some time with them about it's like an
evening explaining what we're going to
do I called the political editor of the
BBC the bill etcetera of ITN and also
the editor of sky to say we've got
something you're going to want to know
about it I knew one or two of these
characters so I did say look I wouldn't
be calling an S it was important and I
really wouldn't be inviting you in and
this would be thought it was worth your
time I really think you don't want to
miss this to get a phone call like that
from a press office or a big media group
like The Telegraph was rare if not
unique my phone went it was a mate at
the told RAF you need to come in he said
we've got something to show you
believe me getting the reply you've got
to come in and he said it in a way that
I knew he meant it I headed to the
telegraph Victoria headquarters
remember going up a long escalator up to
the newsroom taken into a room the door
was shut and then I was told the
Telegraph had the disc was splashing the
paper on it tonight we could give you
the information he can't take it from
here but we think you'll think it's a
big story then I remember 10 o'clock on
the evening for publication putting the
main news channels on every single one
of them that was the the main first
story and you think at that point right
we've got something here
[Music]
good evening Gordon Brown is among a
group of 13 cabinet ministers whose
expense claims are being revealed in
detail by a national newspaper
[Music]
the embarrassment begins tonight for the
government it will follow we're told
four other parties and four people at
lower levels can you claim 17,000 to do
out servants quarters in your van so
that is undisputed is it not total
disgrace I've done nothing criminal
that's been awful thing if you know it's
about jealousy
[Music]
I think it's very bad expected mark
libecki you've been fingered a bit by
The Telegraph his authority seems to be
draining away people are right to be
angry but she's still in her job it goes
for the prime minister he must behave as
well I think you should get the facts
right within a few days it became
obvious that's the public were outraged
by what they were reading and and all of
a sudden we were no longer a small group
of people within the Telegraph the sort
of veil was drawn back and people got to
really see how taxpayers money was being
used Gordon Brown was probably on the
phone to our then editor shouting almost
every day and of course it was hard for
him because he was prime minister and
suddenly the reality of what MPs had
been claiming while everyone else was
tightening their belts exploded I'm Andy
Coulson former director of
communications
Michael Duggar I was the chief political
spokesman number 10 Downing Street
further than Prime Minister Gordon Brown
we had decided to go with the cabinet
the ministers and then the opposition
now we were later accused of that was
political bias and we were favoring the
Tories well actually Labour were in
government we had to go for the
government first but it did give the
Tories about two or three days to get
their their ducks in in a row to a
degree but that said they still got
pretty lambasted the Telegraph set out
with a with what I thought actually was
a you know a reasonably clear process on
how you would approach these stories
that you would give us time some time
there's an argument as to whether or not
enough time but some time to consider
these allegations before you enter press
we were given you know enough time this
sort of the usual amount of time a
journalist would give you to respond to
a story they're writing for the
following day but it was an incredibly
detailed complex
story and trying to piece all of that
together and you're dealing with you
know different cabinet ministers their
officers they're in meetings you're
trying to pull them out you're trying to
do it drawers to try and establish the
facts before deciding how to respond but
it really hit Downing Street like a
tsunami did that story what kit became
clear like within days is that they were
taking apart the whole system and I was
like wow that's actually surprising
they're not going after one partition
they're not going after one party
they're looking at the whole system MPs
have been dreading the moment this
summer when all their past expenses
receipts were due to be published the
MPS really thought it was okay so you're
claiming expenses on a second home when
you have three and you've got an income
coming in from it they were sort of so
shocked and appalled to find out that
people really didn't think he was okay
but um yeah so that was it when they
were hanging out they still were like
well this is outrageous you just don't
understand the system and you're making
and we're like no we do understand the
system and you have to be fair not
broken the rules but it is not looking
great that you're getting all helipad
heads trimmed remember margaret Moran
getting in a shouting match and gestured
with Rosa Prince about how dare she ring
her so she had done up one house at
public expense at a great deal of public
expense and then she'd decided oh no
that's not my main home my main home is
actually miles away I phoned her up and
she was incredibly indignant and defiant
of her screaming at me in a very
undignified manner and I think in the
end she just hung up on me
I remember Shahid Malik came out I was
literally giving an interview on air I
seem to remember attacking us for for
what we said and he took a call from the
cabinet secretary or someone in there
the other saying you need to resign now
or you need sir you need we're
suspending you because it appears like
you briefed Samir sealed and they're
sort of playing out in real time in
front of us there was a group of MPs
from Emory people at Elliot Morley David
cheetah who had fraudulently claimed for
mortgages so
part of what we're doing was checking
people's mortgage claims against whether
mortgages existed which seems like a
basic thing to do which you thought the
parliamentary authorities did but they
didn't a number of MPs were not just
over claiming on their expenses but
actually claiming in a way that was
criminal even though we thought this
would be big and it was icing and it was
huge the level of miss doing and even
criminality was on a scale that even at
the start we couldn't have imagined
Polly watts was going through very
carefully and slowly putting all of the
addresses into a spreadsheet to work out
what they're claiming where they were
living and gradually we got these
matches ping and you find out that two
MPs were living at the same address and
both claiming expenses and that's where
it got the area of alleged fraud and
that's what we thought wow this could
really mean this could end political
careers and possibly send some MPs to
jail you could see that Eliot more he'd
been claiming eight hundred pounds a
month for mortgage it didn't exist and
it very quickly became clear that he was
he claimed about 16,000 pounds over a
period of about 20 months and at that
point we just knew that he was in very
serious problems I think the arrest of
MPs MPs standing down and he's being
suspended mp's being offered peerages I
mean never mind those that went to jail
an awful lot of them had their careers
ended either because they were forced to
stand down or they were shoved into the
Lord's or they were given a knighthood
but it ended a lot of careers in
addition to those that went to jail as I
headed home from Downing Street having
done a live for the BBC's 10 o'clock
news my mobile phone when I picked it up
and I heard the raucous sound of jeering
embiez and one in particular was holding
the phone and was saying to me he was
clearly drunk and he was clearly angry
you don't like our expenses we're gonna
come for you we're gonna get your
expenses published see how you like it
then he held the phone into the bar at
the House of Commons there was a roar of
approval it was at that moment I thought
this story's not just big in some nasty
the immediate reaction to what the
Telegraph did was not hurrah for the
Telegraph this is a work of journalistic
genius it was more has this organization
committed contempt of Parliament shall
we drag the editor to the the bar of the
House of Commons and can we get the
police involved or shall we have a raid
from Scotland Yard on the telegraph
offices there were a number of MPs who
wanted to pursue you know some form of
or at least in at least an investigate
if you like the possibilities of legal
action against the paper and
particularly against the editor will
alert later when we realize quite what
we were dealing with there was a lot of
concern about about being arrested about
the legality of it all about the safety
of it all yeah yeah we're very worried
about the the threat of legal action
although we were confident that we had
all the information so there was nothing
wrong but we were worried that the
police would might become involved or
that Parliament would do something I
remember hearing a Labour MP on the
radio suggesting that we still be
investigated and possibly arrested
because the material was probably stolen
I've got a strong memory of taking a
phone call from a very senior figure at
Scotland Yard who'd been urged to mount
an investigation into what we had done
and then he rang a couple of days later
to say he was suspending the
investigation because it was clear no a
galaxy had been committed my name is
Paul Robert Stevenson I used to be the
Commissioner of the mattress to until
11:00 there was an approach by the house
authorities to the Metropolitan Police
Service that we should be looking at the
circumstances as to how this leak took
place and suggesting there might be some
sort of criminal offence I have to be
honest from the outset I thought that
was rather fanciful I guess the clearest
cut element would have been if this had
been a matter of national security it
clearly wasn't a matter of national
security it might have been a matter of
national embarrassment and personal
embarrassment for a lot of rather stupid
and irresponsible people for there was
another relief certainly I know it was a
massive relief for will
and for us all remember that first day
when we were still worried that we might
be prosecuted a couple of the
commentators came out and wrote really
supportive comments about how this is
important for press freedom
remember Quentin lots of the Daily Mail
doing that and thinking that they were
that this was big that they were
supporting us and that the whole of
Fleet Street was coming together
I remember Simon Jenkins column in the
in the Guardian saying you know saying
the Telegraph had done the right thing
and more and more it's a graduate so
there was that feeling that tide swung
behind us it was it was it was just
ludicrous I have to say the word
ludicrous comes back again and again
these are public figures in receipt of
public money supposedly representing the
public in Parliament and they were they
were they were sort of on the fiddle
from my perspective as a newspaper
executive what one of the most
gratifying things was the way in which
the team gelled I mean III picked the
team and they were great they got on
really really well and you could see
they were they were firing off each
other
you know they had different skills and
different personalities in this small
hot very smelly room by the end of a
week or two and it worked very very
nicely we didn't we didn't really leave
the office I don't think I mean we'd go
and go see for a meal it's a few hours
and then come back in again and you know
it just was absolutely relentless a
member of the comment staff who didn't
know what was happening
put his head round the door and sat down
hi anyone want to go for a drink he was
sort of at 7:00 or 8:00 at night there
must be 10 of us in there and we all put
our heads up and just stared at him we
couldn't even speak we were all so
absorbed and shocked and and just swept
up in in what we were looking at that no
one could even respond so he saw 10
pairs of eyes looking at how many he
just went I guess not and wandered off
okay we had this ongoing wall the wall
of death or something out of gory glory
so we had we got to the point quite
early on of printing out photographs of
the MPs and sticking up and crossing
them out one by one
pictures of MPs who have to pay back
money or apologize or so
the thumbnail next selection by the end
of it it was it was in full of different
MPs who done different things and I
think there came a time where the room
had to be dismantled because we were
changing the office plan and somebody
took it all down and put in a box
carefully for posterity
and left it somewhere safer than the the
cleaners threw it all away but they well
these things happen
well this at one point I was like sorry
I was like what's the weather like
outside and he was like it's raining and
we just had no way of knowing whether it
was rain not and it wasn't raining but
he didn't want us leaving the office is
that it was intense I was half
firefighting half making sure that
stories needed to have statements or be
reacted to we also had a number of
people that wanted to talk about the
story although they weren't actually
involved with it so in many ways it was
also like herding cats one of the funny
things about term mp's expenses was that
it really did benefit sales enormously
at a time where newspaper sales were
declining and we noticed I seem to
recall that there was one particular
area I think it was in South Wales where
newspaper sales were going up and up and
up and we couldn't really account for it
and then somebody said eventually they
worked out that it seemed to be where
there was a an HMRC office where they
looked at mp's tax returns and it seemed
that everybody there was was buying
extra copies in order to find out what
they could gain on MPs whether whether
that's true or apocryphal I don't know
but that's that's what I was told I
think it's a disgrace I think it's
outrageous how the MPs are going to
spend our tax money on their frivolous
lifestyles the first rule if you're a
politician dealing with a rolling story
where there are new revelations every
day where you're not in control of the
flow of data when you've already lost
public opinion is to get ahead of it not
to be constantly racing to catch up
Brown was always racing to catch up
always angry always resentful David
Cameron tried to leapfrog him setting up
his own sort of internal inquiry system
it was from the get-go we were clear
that this was full square in the you
know in the in the realm of public
interest whatever the technicalities of
it this was this was clearly you know
any investigation a piece of work that
was in the public interest I am angry
about what has happened it is out of
order some of this is an abuse of
taxpayers money and I'm gonna deal with
it and you talk to yourself about the
daily mail testing David camera the
advantage of not being in government so
by definition your pitch the country is
about change I certainly think after the
MPS expenses scandal the the appetite
for change was a greater one I think it
was harder for labor and government
because we've been in power it happened
on our watch it didn't really figure so
much in the election I don't think in
terms of people's you know desire to
vote labor or conservative but it
definitely impacted on people's desire
not to vote for anyone in one sense it
was a sort of fascinating exercising how
different people kind of react when
under pressure and when faced with
accusations that are quite personal
nature actually and I remember one
particular question time I think it
probably must be in the middle of the
first week Margaret Beckett was honors
representing the government and the
audience started booing I'm really going
it are you going to pay back 72,000
pounds that you've taken no I'm not
because as I as I pointed out a moment
ago
and there are two reasons for that one
of them is and I realized at that point
that the public the tide of public
opinion was actually was not just
outrage but it was it was anger really
really angry
the rules the system for MPS was written
because they're honourable members there
were and you just read over there was
quite explicit it has to be holy and
necessary to do the job as an MP what
could be more plainer than that they
don't need scatter cushions bottles of
gin plugs it's not the system that
sarong it's the people the MPs
themselves
I like the fun ones I like the ones the
you know I forget who it was claiming
for her he'll come back to me her name
would claiming for dog food and Scotch
eggs and the guy who claimed from a
pepper army from a minibar mark Francois
and I absolutely insisted just because
I'd loved the advert from when I was a
kid on having the headline described him
as a bit of an animal just because I
like the pepper army ever and I was we
did have good moments of light relief
remember Phil Wallace arguing with
Martin Beckford about the facts he
claimed for his wife's tampons because
the money got paid back going through
all this information you got you got sir
so by inside Dieruff say ginger crinkles
and that was one of the things which one
an MP is claimed for so I went out and
bought ten packets from Sainsbury's and
gave them out in the office and so we
survived the diet of ginger crinkles for
at least a day or two
I had a great letter from Austin
Mitchell the Labour MP who was the only
MP who decided to react with humour and
he wrote a long letter explaining that
he was very sorry for claiming for
ginger crinkle biscuits and he was also
extremely sorry for claiming for us and
gin and some vodka and he said that he
didn't drink and that therefore the
alcohol must have been claimed by his
wife and that he would he would
immediately assess whether she was an
alcoholic and put her in rehab if
necessary Richard younger Ross whose
town in telling he planned for a
bookcase called the Don Juan which I
love the fact that Christians had paid
for pictures of himself you know and and
was Christian one with a trouser press
you know again to someone claimed for a
trouser press and it was so Alan
Partridge I remember Natasha Engle who
is now quite a senior MP she says the
backbench committee remember her phoning
me up she she was so she couldn't bear
the anticipation
she couldn't even wait for it to be her
turn she phoned me up ahead of time and
said I bought all these glasses from
John Lewis I know I shouldn't have and I
feel really bad and can you please do
the story now it was
they were in such a state Lee's MP is
waiting for the earth calls there were
really clear patterns that came in from
EMC beginning which was stuff like it
was done on the financial year so at the
end of when they were they got to March
they'd suddenly realize they hadn't
spent all the money they'd want to do so
they would just bolt to John Lewis and
like Nietzsche just go mad I remember
Tom Watson who's now deputy leader
they've gone to John Lewis and had fun
at the public expense and at the time
he'd lost a lot of weight since but Tom
Watson was very overweight
he must have obviously checked his own
expenses and he spotted the thing that I
spotted which was that head chart for a
pizza cutter so I remember him phoning
me and saying please don't put the pizza
cutter in please we're old mates don't
put the people who cut around and I had
to say I'm sorry the cutter is going in
I think was Nick Allen was just he
served at one point was like gather
around people and this was a few weeks
in I can't remember how long we've been
there and we were quite cynical at that
point quite jaded and we dragged
ourselves over and Nick was like look
and we were like what is that and he was
like that is a duck house I just should
have involuntarily said via what the
hell is a floating duck island for 1645
pounds as I remember it Matthew Bailey
was in it was sort of sitting in my
eyeline and he responded and slightly
Frisian language you know what what is a
floating duck island and I remember the
duck house as well and I definitely out
in a word that rhymes with it but I yeah
I mean they were proper kind of you know
I'm doing it now you know you sort of
you sort of accept and shook your head
and just thought you know I don't I
don't know how that happened people
started to sort of come over and look at
this and then he flicked on his screen
and you could see it on Google Maps you
could zoom he presumed right into the
middle of this lake and it was this
little square and there was the duck
house you can see it from space that was
a good day
that's how you end up with you know MPs
on TV and radio you know talking about
how proud there are they are they are
that their house you know is compared to
Balmoral do you know what it's about
jealousy I've got a very very large
house some set people say it looks like
bowel mold it's not particularly
attractive it just doesn't me nicely you
know not a great moment there be Labour
MPs would want to talk about their
expenses and talk about perhaps what the
telegraph had got and they would come in
and they'd be very sheepish that be very
quiet a lot would be very upset and in
tears and I would sort of say trying to
cut to the chase look what we're talking
about here is this overly complex
mortgage arrangements or is it consumer
goods you know being like somebody's
claim to clean their moat and it was
just like this you know like roser and
full-out rate and she was just like she
was just really cross and she was it's
like I mean how could somebody blame to
clean their moat for God's sake you know
I was genuinely taken aback and shot at
that yeah I was the moat so this was
Douglas Hardwick it was Rob who rang
Andy Coulson because it was very early
on and saying yeah it's bad it was bad
and saying there's a moat now mr. Hogg
always said that he never specifically
claimed for the moat that it was part of
a deal with the fees office to allow him
to claim the full allowance to maintain
his estate but the public is stank but
as to the claims that I made they were
agreed in what in advance and Iraqi and
fall within both the spirit and those
moments the moat the duck house no they
weren't subtle they were you know they
were crystal clear dan damaging moments
for for the Conservative Party and we
all and we all knew it some veteran
politicians are horrified at the wounds
inflicted mention expenses and the fury
was switched on like that it was the
symbol if you like of one rule for them
and one rule for everybody else now
would have been a powerful story at any
other time but this wasn't any other
time it was coming in the wake
of the crash of the banks and more
importantly coming in the wake of the
bailout of the banks a time when it
appeared that men largely who wear suits
yes who live and work in Westminster
were alright but ordinary people were
suffering and so the news that you could
claim for your dog food feared duck
house enraged a country that was already
pretty enraged it really touched a nerve
with people the sense that there was
this organized racket against the people
that had been going on for many years
and by our own diligence and good
fortune we've been able to lift up that
stone and and shine a light and where
one had never been shown before what
will have angered the public was the MPs
were claiming for exactly the sort of
things that they'd have to go out and
buy out of their own pocket the stuff
that sticks in my mind is really the
flipping houses I mean these people who
are building up property empires by
moving from one house the next claiming
the mortgage interest you know paying
for the renovations to these properties
I mean sure the small claims are funny
and they added to the you know the the
public shock about the whole thing but I
just did not realize less all of that
that some of these people were getting
rich well I was astonished even as
someone who'd been heavily involved in
this and had been aware of some of the
abuses I was astonished the venal nature
of some of these claims the most
egregious ones were they were the were
the house-flipping claims which never
got held to account and they should have
done some of those were astonishing and
the MPS some of those MPs got reelected
and they shouldn't have done MPs who
behave now which should have got
reelected this was you know just not on
at his lowest level and an outrage at
its highest in
there was there were there are the
argument in defense of it you know and
several people tried to make it as you
as you know often against our advice you
know it just did the sort of reaction to
would be it was laughter Matt did a
fantastic cartoon it was not necessarily
unfair which simply had two MPs walking
across the bridge I saw has a parliament
and she said as soon as I saw what I'd
been up to
I knew the speaker had to go the speaker
at that time Michael Martin made a
catastrophic and historic error he saw
himself as a kind of shop steward a
trade union representative for MPs he
saw his job therefore as defending them
and their reputation and the reputation
in the House of Commons against what the
public were reading in the Daily
Telegraph and hearing on their TV
screens so instead of becoming the agent
of change the manage said we have to
improve things this man who said remain
mistakes we can reform the system he was
the guy making excuses which is why in
the end he was kicked out the first for
hundreds of years the biggest scout the
expenses crisis got plain I think the
speaker's run out of Road and you ought
to go frankly and everybody's interests
including his own we have an
unprecedented situation where the
speaker has I'm afraid be one of the
blockages to reform of MPs expenses
where he's blocked release of freedom of
information and we're I'm afraid he's
thought it's in parlons interests to
sweep everything under the carpet rather
than to move into a new regime
[Music]
some people lost their jobs some people
deserve to lose their jobs by the way so
there's a bit of natural justice in in
some instances I think I was sad for
colleagues who I felt who had got really
mixed up in a bad system and through no
fault of their own you know the rules
were how they were at the time the
culture was what it was at the time they
had come into this I don't think they'd
acted in a way that was dishonorable or
that they were out necessary to enrich
themselves I think there were
individuals who were but there were far
more who weren't I still think the vast
majority people who come into politics
do so for public service I felt
particularly bad when I had to ring
katyusha who was a junior Treasury
minister who accidentally or
inadvertently included in a file and
note to her accountant about reducing a
capital gains tax on on one of her
houses and she had to resign because of
that and she had a like me she had a
very young child and when I rang she was
at her home and she I could obviously
hear that you know she had a screaming
baby in the background and because I had
a screaming baby of him at my house I
did feel then I did feel a bit because I
knew it's gonna be a front page and it's
there and I knew is gonna be the end of
her ministerial career
I remember the night after Elliot Morley
I was emailing my sister and I said I
was feeling kinda sad about what
happened to her at Morley and it was you
know that his life was ruined and that
was going to be devastated him and his
family and everybody else and she was
like what you might have created a
situation where you get better better
politicians in the future and the thing
is I mean I'm not sure if that's what
happened I think there was this enormous
sort of rage from the general public
that was justified but I think it just
created a really profound cynicism a lot
of MPs I think went through a difficult
time as a result of of the stories that
we did and we were very mindful of that
I think one or two in particular found
it very challenging during the process I
did make sure that I contacted the
leaders of the three main political
parties obviously
every MP was given fair notice of the
stories and they were given a chance to
comment on it and to tell us that we it
was inaccurate and they got a fair share
of commentary in each story but I was
concerned that they were one or two
funny a particularly challenging and as
a result of that went the extra mile in
my mind to ensure that they could be
protected at the biggest parliamentary
scandal that we've seen for 200 years
and I want to apologize to you on behalf
of the Labour Party for the behavior of
some of our members of parliament The
effect of this scandal on Gordon Brown's
government I think was terminal David
Cameron who was the coming man he was
the leader of the Opposition he said he
took a stand saying this is wrong I will
sort it out but Gordon Brown was slow at
that I think it's that summarized that
he was so almost clinging on to power by
then it became quite apparent through
the following 12 months they are real we
would have a real problem winning the
2010 election looking back now it's easy
to forget quite held dangerous these
times were for Gordon Brown large parts
of his cabinet were unhappy with his
leadership large parts of the Labour
back benches were unhappy there was
constant talk of replacing him combine
the economic crisis combined his lack of
personal political skills and charisma
with the expenses crisis and he had a
very dangerous mix indeed these were
dangerous times
the legacy of the MGP Spencer scandal is
that the system is cleaner that the
rules are tighter that they're properly
scrutinized but independent body and
that some of the masters from which
claims could be submitted previously
have never been outlawed so that's a
good legacy in terms of politics the the
last thing impact I think was really
important people people got to see where
their money was going they got to see
the abuses in the system they got to see
that the way the system should be
reformed well I don't know whether it
would have ever come to light otherwise
I suspect not I suspect that some of the
pair of you was known to some people
already but it hadn't come to light
until until the leak to the Telegraph
and until that release and I do think
and I don't want to under to the
Telegraph here but I think there's a
great public service done to ensure that
we we did something to clean up the our
parliamentary system and the standards
that were being applied there I think
you did lead to a whole new cadre of of
MPs coming in the 2010 intake in the
House of Commons was one of the biggest
ever I think a third of the MPs were
elected for the first time I think the
public has always been hugely cynical
about politicians and skeptical of what
they what their motives are and what
they get up to I think that is not going
to go away anytime soon but ultimately
in a democracy that's entirely healthy
and if you don't have tight scrutiny of
MPs you have a corrupt regime as we see
in lots of other countries fundamentally
damaged politics I think it damaged the
political system I think it damaged
Parliament it created a real anger
towards politicians which i think is
still there a deep speech and a deep
cynicism and without we journalists we
weren't trying to create you know an
alternative we were just knocking down
what would happen what been you know it
has her consequences I'm not sure if
it's all from a telegraph of course not
but you know it was it was something
that people identified with in a really
furious way I think the relationship
between the public and and sort of
political class if you can put it that
way it was already strained pre expenses
I think expenses was a major point of
sort of dislocation and that I'm not
sure well I don't think we've ever
recovered from it's only got worse I
think you can draw a straight line from
the expenses and scandal to brexit I'm
not saying that's the reason why it
happened I'm not even saying that there
are people who walked into the you know
into the voting booth with you know a
dark house or a moat in mind but I think
it was there actually buried deep you
know that sense that you can't trust
them that sense that they're you know
that they're in the end Nell they won't
do what they say they'll do I think that
that was part of the part of the process
and part of the unfortunately par the
reason why you know that we've got such
a gap now between the public around
Barnard and our politicians which I
think in long term can only be bad for
us it was a time and politics was not in
any great regard we've been through the
Great Crash everybody was looking at
professional people I'm wondering
whether they're you know quite up to
scratch and here the people are really
in the country not up to scratch so it
was quite it was quite sensitive moment
and I think Parliament was obviously in
the frame this scandal breaks it is
inherently ludicrous rather than
scandalous in my view it was the
ludicrousness that made it a great story
I think there was a sense that it had
far more impact than we anticipated in
that it led to a new speaker it you
could argue it contributed to the
downfall of the Labor Government's it
certainly contributed to the contempt in
which MPs were held at the time and and
for many years thereafter actually I
think there's been a sense that and I
would say incorrectly that MPs are all
in it for themselves and they've all got
their snouts in the trough and I don't
think we ever intended it to be like
that I have one or two nagging doubts
about the fallout i i watched who was
arrested and who went to prison and i
thought it was just a bit too easy
because they were they were dispensable
people they were
to some extent the less valued MPs and I
I wonder to this day whether whether
there were others who might have been
arrested and sent to prison instead
because it seems to me that just enough
happened to satisfy public disquiet but
those those who bore the brunt were not
big players at the time the sad thing
about this saga is it has reinforced the
idea that was out there the idea frankly
I hear every time I get into the back of
a cab in London they're all the same
mate they say to me they're all on the
take they're all in it for themselves it
wasn't true and it isn't true but the
expenses crisis risks making it looked
like it was true did the expenses crises
create brexit of course it didn't but
combined with other things it may well
have created the circumstances in which
people no longer trusted what they were
told by politicians on the whole I think
most MPs take the attitude that it was
painful and unpleasant but it needed to
happen and we're not going to blame the
messenger but it took a while for that
generally to become the consensus and
there are certainly a few who hold a
grudge I still think there is a tendency
in Parliament's towards secrecy and a
lack of transparency and we see that in
the standards committee now that
effectively its MPs judging themselves
it's still pretty hard to get
information out of the British state and
I'm not totally up to speed on the
latest with MPs expenses but you know
the thing I was trying to do with this
whole campaign that lasted five years
was to enable a member of the public to
just go online or go into Parliament and
look up their MP's receipts that all the
receipts of like what they were claiming
on the taxpayer
you still can't do that I think the MPs
expenses disk was a single moment in in
British politics in terms of
transparency and the importance of
freedom of information
the details that MPs publish today are a
little more limited and what we get is
and not quite as juicy as it was in the
past but being able to go back to the
old days of hiding all this information
than just assuming this had bung on top
of your salary along since gone and in
that sense freedom of information has
been very important I don't know that
any lessons have been learned from MPs
expenses only today there are stories
about how much MPs pay themselves and
and we're not really clear about what
our MPs are worth you can find some
people who say they should earn no more
than a nurse or a teacher and other
people who say that they should be on
the same salary as a footsie chief
executive you hear that quite a lot from
a peaceful enough on the other hand it
did show how transparency helped decent
journalism how courage buy a news
organization can force an organization
to change when it thinks it's above the
rules and above the law I hope that the
legacy of the expenses scandal is that
there's a more transparency in public
life we get to find more things out
about the way in which our money in
particular is spent but I also hope that
it leads to a long term change in the
value of investigative journalism and
that people realize the value in getting
involved in these projects you know the
value it brings to the public the value
it brings to organisations and that
that's something that lasts for many
decades to come still people say what a
great story what a great story
how fantastic to be part of that that's
right it did feel like there was a kind
of a revolution of the pan it was such a
big story at the time you could argue
that this was the biggest political
scandal since Profumo in the early
sixties that was sex this was money I
mean it seems extraordinary to me that's
been ten years because I can remember it
so so clearly and and it's one of those
things
the you you know if people ask what you
do and what you've done in your career
you mentioned that and everyone knows
what you're talking about and and in
there's a real sense of you know
achievement in having been a part of
that team and playing some part in in
telling that story remember that picture
that photograph taken towards the end of
you know if you've got that picture
trying to dig it out and this Rob
sitting in the middle and everyone
looking absolutely ashen-faced
the purple eye drooping brought this
slightly head on one side I was just a
sixer lost it clearly because it was
five to six weeks I'm going for it I
just went off on my own to Victoria
Station and sat on McDonald's and they a
big quarter pounder with cheese on my
own and I don't think I thought a
thought I just stared off into space and
munched it and it was the greatest
cheeseburger or item of food I think
I've ever had I can't remember exactly
how many weeks after it but Chris Hope
coming in saying the punk has been taken
down the bunk has been broken up oh yeah
we want to have a look and it had all
been all the panel's have come down and
it was all just an open office yeah so
it wasn't there anymore that's quite
sound it was such a privilege to work
with that team we knew we were making
history now a very proud of helped I am
naturally a huge believer in the
importance of investigative journalism
and I am obviously well-placed to know
how hard it is to bring stories to life
to put things like this in the public
domain
it wasn't easy it took a lot of hard
work by a lot of reporters who work for
me and it took a lot of courage on the
parts of the editor and of course since
we did mp's expenses we've had the
Leveson inquiry and various other
attempts to limit free speech
and I think we should always bear in
mind the importance of things like MPs
expenses and every time someone tables a
motion to limit the powers of the press
to say this or say that we should look
back to MPs expenses and ask ourselves
would we be able to do that now if this
or that were the law of the land
[Music]
you